Add data integration module README (#359)
AlexsLemonade/scpca-downstream-analyses: optional-integration-analysis/README.md

The merged objects contain the raw and normalized counts for all included libraries as well as batch corrected PCA and UMAP results.

**The data integration analysis workflow cannot be implemented until after users have successfully run the main downstream analysis core workflow as described in this repository's main [README.md](../README.md) file or have downloaded data from the [ScPCA portal](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/).**

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Analysis overview](#analysis-overview)
- [Create metadata file](#create-metadata-file)
- [Configure config file](#configure-config-file)
- [Running the workflow](#running-the-workflow)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Analysis overview

The data integration analysis workflow provided here can be used to create a single object containing data from multiple libraries.
First, the raw and normalized counts data from the original libraries are merged into a single object containing all cells and only shared genes across all libraries.

> Then, batch correction is performed using either [`fastMNN`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/batchelor/man/fastMNN.html) and/or [`harmony`](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/harmony/articles/quickstart.html), and batch corrected PCA and UMAP results are returned in the merged object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, batch correction is performed using either [`fastMNN`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/batchelor/man/fastMNN.html) and/or [`harmony`](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/harmony/articles/quickstart.html).
Batch-corrected PCA and UMAP results are added to the merged object.
```

The merged objects are useful for exploring and comparing data in a group of single-cell/single-nuclei libraries together.

> There are three main steps of this data integration analysis workflow:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three main steps of this data integration workflow:
```

The merged objects contain the raw and normalized counts for all included libraries as well as batch corrected PCA and UMAP results.

**The data integration analysis workflow cannot be implemented until after users have successfully run the main downstream analysis core workflow as described in this repository's main [README.md](../README.md) file or have downloaded data from the [ScPCA portal](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/).**

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Analysis overview](#analysis-overview)
- [Create metadata file](#create-metadata-file)
- [Configure config file](#configure-config-file)
- [Running the workflow](#running-the-workflow)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Analysis overview

The data integration analysis workflow provided here can be used to create a single object containing data from multiple libraries.
First, the raw and normalized counts data from the original libraries are merged into a single object containing all cells and only shared genes across all libraries.

> Then, batch correction is performed using either `fastMNN` and/or `harmony` and batch corrected PCA and UMAP results are returned in the merged object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, batch correction is performed using either `fastMNN` and/or `harmony`, and batch corrected PCA and UMAP results are returned in the merged object.
```
I would add the links here as well as below.

The merged objects are useful for exploring and comparing data in a group of single-cell/single-nuclei libraries together.

There are three main steps of this data integration analysis workflow:

1. **Merge**: The counts data from each of the libraries are first merged into one `SingleCellExperiment` object.
2. **Integrate**: The merged data is integrated using [`fastMNN`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/batchelor/man/fastMNN.html) and/or [`harmony`](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/harmony/articles/quickstart.html) to obtain batch corrected reduced dimensionality embeddings.
3. **Generate integration summary report**: Once the data from the multiple libraries are integrated and stored in the `SingleCellExperiment` object, the results from batch correction are evaluated to create a summary report.

> This report includes UMAPs showing all libraries before and after batch correction and summaries of a set of integration metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This report includes UMAPs showing data from all libraries before and after batch correction and summaries of a set of integration metrics.
```

> These metrics are displayed in plots and include iLISI, batch ARI, within-batch ARI, and batch average silhouette width (ASW).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These metrics include iLISI, batch ARI, within-batch ARI, and batch average silhouette width (ASW).
```
Editing this now, but when we address #361 we will probably want to expand on this more.

The plots are displayed in a html report for ease of reference.

**Note** that the same [software requirements for the core workflow](../README.md#3-additional-dependencies) are also required for this clustering workflow.
R 4.2 is required for running our pipeline, along with Bioconductor 3.15.
If you are using conda, dependencies can be installed as [part of the initial setup](../README.md#snakemakeconda-installation).
Package dependencies for the analysis workflows in this repository are managed using [`renv`](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/index.html), which can be installed independently if desired, but we recommend using Snakemake's conda integration to set up the R environment and all dependencies that the workflow will use.

## Create metadata file

> Before running the workflow, you will need to create a project metadata file as a tab-separated value (TSV) file that contains the relevant data for your input files needed to run the data integration workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before running the workflow, you must create a project metadata file as a tab-separated value (TSV) file.
Each row in the metadata should correspond to a single-cell/single-nuclei library to include in integration. 
```
Just adding some clarity here.

The file should contain the following columns:

| column name | description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| `sample_id` |unique ID for each piece of tissue or sample that cells were obtained from,  all libraries that were sampled from the same piece of tissue should have the same `sample_id` |
| `library_id` | unique ID used for each set of cells that has been prepped and sequenced separately |

> | `processed_sce_filepath` | the full path to the RDS file containing the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object, each library ID should have a unique `processed_sce_filepath`; note that this RDS file is the output from the [core analysis workflow](../README.md#6-expected-output) OR the processed object from the [Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas portal](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `processed_sce_filepath` | the full path to the RDS file containing the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object, each library ID should have a unique `processed_sce_filepath`; note that this RDS file is the output RDS file from the [core analysis workflow](../README.md#6-expected-output) OR the processed file from the [Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas portal](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/).
The filename should contain the following format, `<library_id>_processed.rds`. |
```

Author: Just noting that I put the changes here all on one line to save the markdown formatting (the table broke when I used two lines)

Reviewer: Ahh makes sense! I did not put together that it was in a table.

> | `integration_group` | the variable specifying which libraries should be grouped and integrated |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `integration_group` | Name used to specify which libraries should be merged.
All libraries with the same `integration_group` will be merged and integrated into a single`SingleCellExperiment` object. |
```

Learn more about snakemake configuration files [here](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/configuration.html).

The config file contains two sets of parameters:

- **[Project-specific Parameters](../config/config.yaml#L3)**: This set of parameters are for specifying dataset or project related details. 
These parameters are **required** to run the workflow on your data.
- **[Processing Parameters](../config/integration_config.yaml)**: This set of parameters specify configurations for the integration method(s) to be performed.
You can change them to explore your data but it is optional.
You can modify the relevant parameters by manually updating the `config/integration_config.yaml` file using a text editor of your choice.

To run the workflow on your data, modify the following parameters in the `config/config.yaml` and `config/integration_config.yaml` files:

| Parameter        | Description |
|------------------|-------------|
| `results_dir` | full path to the directory where output files will be stored |

> | `integration_project_metadata` | full path to your integration-specific project metadata TSV file |

Reviewer: Okay this makes me think we need to add a `results_dir` argument to the integration config, so users only need to modify one file.

|[View Config File](../config/config.yaml)|
|---|

|[View Integration Config File](../config/integration_config.yaml)|
|---|

The [`config/integration_config.yaml`](../config/integration_config.yaml) file also contains additional processing parameters like the integration method(s) that should be used and the number of mulit-processing threads to use when merging the data.
We have set default values for these parameters. 
Learn more about the [processing parameters](../additional-docs/processing-parameters.md#integration-analysis-parameters) and how to modify them.

## Running the workflow

> The execution file with the data integration Snakemake workflow is named `integration.snakefile` and can be found in the root directory. To tell snakemake to run the specific clustering workflow be sure to use the `--snakefile` or `-s` option followed by the name of the snakefile, `integration.snakefile`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution file with the data integration Snakemake workflow is named `integration.snakefile` and can be found in the root directory. 
To tell snakemake to run the specific clustering workflow be sure to use the `--snakefile` or `-s` option followed by the name of the snakefile, `integration.snakefile`.
```

> After you have successfully modified the required project-specific parameters in the config file and navigated to within the root directory of the `scpca-downstream-analyses` repository, you can run the clustering Snakemake workflow with just the `--cores` and `--use-conda` flags as in the following example: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you have successfully modified the required project-specific parameters in the `integration_config.yaml` file and navigated to within the root directory of the `scpca-downstream-analyses` repository, you can run the clustering Snakemake workflow with just the `--cores` and `--use-conda` flags as in the following example: 
```
I want to make sure about which config file they should be editing. And based on my earlier comment, let's have everything in the integration config file so we can just refer to that one.

# Optional Integration Analysis

This directory includes a data integration analysis workflow that can help users integrate data from multiple libraries. 

**The data integration analysis workflow cannot be implemented until after users have successfully run the main downstream analysis core workflow as described in this repository's main [README.md](../README.md) file or have downloaded data from the [ScPCA portal](https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/).**

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->
**Table of Contents**

- [Analysis overview](#analysis-overview)
- [Create metadata file](#create-metadata-file)
- [Configure config file](#configure-config-file)

> - [Running the workflow](#running-the-workflow)

Reviewer: We also need an expected output section here. Maybe we should file another issue for adding in expected input/output so we can review that separately.

Author: Filed https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-downstream-analyses/issues/362 to track adding the expected input and output sections

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->

## Analysis overview

> The data integration analysis workflow provided here can be used to explore multiple libraries simultaneously by integrating the data associated with specified libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data integration analysis workflow provided here can be used to create a single object containing data from multiple libraries.
First, the raw and normalized counts data from the original libraries are merged into a single object containing all cells and only shared genes across all libraries.
Then, batch correction is performed using either `fastMNN` and/or `harmony` and batch corrected PCA and UMAP results are returned in the merged object.
The merged objects are useful for exploring and comparing data in a group of single-cell/single-nuclei libraries together.
```

Again, adding a little bit more background and context here. I repeated the same statement about what's in the merged output, but I think making sure that is clear is important.

There are three main steps of this data integration analysis workflow:

> 1. **Merge**: The data from each of the libraries are first merged into one `SingleCellExperiment` object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Merge**: The counts data from each of the libraries are first merged into one `SingleCellExperiment` object.
```

> 2. **Integrate**: The merged data is integrated using [`fastMNN`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/batchelor/man/fastMNN.html) and/or [`harmony`](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/harmony/articles/quickstart.html) as specified by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Integrate**: The merged data is integrated using [`fastMNN`](https://rdrr.io/github/LTLA/batchelor/man/fastMNN.html) and/or [`harmony`](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/harmony/articles/quickstart.html) to obtain batch corrected reduced dimensionality embeddings. 
```

> 3. **Plot**: Once the data from the multiple libraries are integrated and stored in the `SingleCellExperiment` object, the results from each of the integration methods used are displayed in a UMAP plot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Generate integration summary report**: Once the data from the multiple libraries are integrated and stored in the `SingleCellExperiment` object, the results from batch correction are evaluated to create a summary report.
This report includes UMAPs showing all libraries before and after batch correction and summaries of a set of integration metrics.
```
I think we should focus on the purpose of this step which is to evaluate integration rather than the actions in this step (plotting). That being said, I think I want to wait to further edit this section until we have completed the report. So can you file an issue to track updating the docs to reflect the finished integration report?

Author: Filed issue https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-downstream-analyses/issues/361 to track updating the docs once the report is complete 👍

> Additionally, integration performance metrics are shown for each of the integration methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

These metrics are displayed in plots and include iLISI, batch ARI, within-batch ARI, and batch average silhouette width (ASW).
The plots are displayed in a html report for ease of reference.

**Note** that the same [software requirements for the core workflow](../README.md#3-additional-dependencies) are also required for this clustering workflow.
R 4.2 is required for running our pipeline, along with Bioconductor 3.15.
Package dependencies for the analysis workflows in this repository are managed using [`renv`](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/index.html), which must be installed locally prior to running the workflow.

> If you are using conda, dependencies can be installed as [part of the initial setup](../README.md#snakemakeconda-installation).

Reviewer: Do we want to switch these sentences around a little? I think we just need them to setup using `conda`, so we want to state that first and alter how we refer to `renv`? Since we handle everything with `conda`, including `renv` then we should update this and the docs in the other modules to reflect that.

## Create metadata file

Before running the workflow, you will need to create a project metadata file as a tab-separated value (TSV) file that contains the relevant data for your input files needed to run the data integration workflow.
The file should contain the following columns:

- `sample_id`, unique ID for each piece of tissue or sample that cells were obtained from,  all libraries that were sampled from the same piece of tissue should have the same `sample_id`.
- `library_id`, unique ID used for each set of cells that has been prepped and sequenced separately.
- `processed_sce_filepath`, the full path to the RDS file containing the processed `SingleCellExperiment` object.
Each library ID should have a unique `processed_sce_filepath`.
- `integration_group`, the variable specifying which libraries should be grouped and integrated.

> 

Reviewer: Can we turn this into a table?

Reviewer: Also for the `processed_sce_filepath`, we should explicitly state this is the output from the core workflow OR the processed object from scpca.

|[View Example Metadata File](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-downstream-analyses/blob/main/example-data/project-metadata/example-integration-library-metadata.tsv)|
|---|

## Configure config file

> As in the main core workflow, we have provided an [example snakemake configuration file](../config/config.yaml), `config/config.yaml`, which defines all parameters needed to run the workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As in the main core workflow, we have provided an [example snakemake configuration file, `config/config.yaml`](../config/config.yaml), which defines all parameters needed to run the workflow.
```

- **[Processing Parameters](../config/integration_config.yaml)**: This set of parameters specify configurations for the integration method(s) to be performed.
You can change them to explore your data but it is optional.
You can modify the relevant parameters by manually updating the `config/integration_config.yaml` file using a text editor of your choice.

To run the workflow on your data, modify the following parameters in the `config/config.yaml` and `config/integration_config.yaml` files:

| Parameter        | Description |
|------------------|-------------|
| `results_dir` | full path to the directory where output files will be stored |
| `integration_project_metadata` | full path to your integration-specific project metadata TSV file |

|[View Config File](../config/config.yaml)|
|---|

|[View Integration Config File](../config/integration_config.yaml)|
|---|

The [`config/integration_config.yaml`](../config/integration_config.yaml) file also contains additional processing parameters like the integration method(s) that should be used and the number of mulit-processing threads to use when merging the data.
We have set default values for these parameters. 

> Learn more about the [processing parameters](../additional-docs/processing-parameters.md#integration-analysis-parameters) and how to modify them.

Reviewer: We don't have this section yet right? Another issue that should be filed.

Author: Filed https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-downstream-analyses/issues/363 to track this 👍
